---
title: " *čok-"
description:  1 to pray 2 to sacrifice 3 to baptize 4 to worship 5 bailment, pledge
---
<strong> 1 to pray 2 to sacrifice 3 to baptize 4 to worship 5 bailment, pledge</strong><br><br>
<strong>Proto-Turkic</strong>:  *čok-<br>
<strong>Altaic etymology</strong>:  Altaic etymology<br>
<strong> Proto-Altaic</strong>:  *č`i̯ŏ̀k`ó<br>
<strong>Russian meaning</strong>:  1 молиться 2 приносить жертву 3 креститься 4 поклоняться 5 порука, поручительство<br>
<strong>Turkic</strong>:  *čok-<br>
<strong>Mongolian</strong>:  *čoku-<br>
<strong>Tungus-Manchu</strong>:  *čixa<br>
<strong>Japanese</strong>:  *tǝ̀nká-<br>
<strong>Comments</strong>:  VEWT 113-114, Егоров 328, Федотов 2, 426-427. Räsänen's attempt to explain the verb as "baptism through immersion" (linking Kypch. čoqur 'pit' and Taranchi čoqur- 'to sink' (R 3, 2007) appears unconvincing. The former word is derived from čok- 'to delve', and the latter should be corrected to čökür- according to more modern sources. The semantic transfer of a pagan ceremony to the Christian one seems quite natural in an islamicized society. The same root may be represented by the exclamation (made during a libation), Oyr. čoq!, Shor šoq!, and further - the approbatory exclamation Kirgh. čok!, Kaz. šoq! etc. Quite unlikely is the hypothesis of a loan from Hebrew (Y. Malov, quoted in Федотов). In fact, the meaning in Chuv. ('pledge') and the external parallels suggest that the religious component in the meaning of *čok- is relatively late (having evolved after the separation of Bulgars)<br>
<strong>Tatar</strong>:  čuqɨn- 3<br>
<strong>Uzbek</strong>:  čọqin- 3, 1 (disapprovingly), 4<br>
<strong>Uighur</strong>:  čoqun- 3<br>
<strong>Sary-Yughur</strong>:  čoq et- 1 (ЯЖУ)<br>
<strong>Turkmen</strong>:  čoqun- 3<br>
<strong>Khakassian</strong>:  čoɣɨn- 1 (Sag.- R 2, 2014)<br>
<strong>Shor</strong>:  šoqta- 'to besprinkle idols with an exclmation šoq!' R 4, 1024)<br>
<strong>Oyrat</strong>:  čoɣɨr- 2 (Lebed. R 3, 2014), čoqto- 'to besprinkle idols with an exclamation čoq!' (R 3, 2009)<br>
<strong>Chuvash</strong>:  śъk 5<br>
<strong>Kirghiz</strong>:  čoqun- 3, 4<br>
<strong>Noghai</strong>:  šoqɨn- 3<br>
<strong>Bashkir</strong>:  suqɨn- 3<br>
<strong>Karakalpak</strong>:  šoqɨn- 3<br>
<strong>Kumyk</strong>:  čoqun- 3<br>


